Expand AI policy to cover contribution quality and disclosure (#494)
maplibre/maplibre: AI_POLICY.md

Contributors should be sufficiently confident that their contribution is high enough quality that asking for a review is a good use of scarce maintainer time, and they should be **able to answer questions about their work** during review.

## Disclosure

Community members are **expected to be transparent and label contributions that contain substantial amounts of tool-generated content**, including in issues, pull requests and bug reports. Disclosure is not penalized during PR review: our policy on labelling is intended to help reviewers calibrate attention and ask better follow-up questions. Contributors should note details on tool usage (such as models and prompts used) in PR descriptions.

## Using AI for communication

To ensure sufficient self review and understanding of the work, it is strongly recommended that contributors write PR descriptions themselves (if needed, using tools for translation or copy-editing). The PR description should explain the motivation, implementation approach, expected impact, and any open questions or uncertainties to the same extent as a contribution made without tool assistance.

> Do not post AI-generated messages in discussions and issues as your own. We want to read your own genuine expression of your thoughts. It's fine to use whatever tools you like for help with spelling, grammar, or translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not post AI-generated messages in discussions and issues as your own. We want to read your own genuine expression of your thoughts. It's fine to use whatever tools you like for help with spelling, grammar, or translation, just don't auto-generate it.
```

<!-- Adapted from Zulip https://zulip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributing/contributing.html#using-ai-for-communication -->

## Handling Violations

> If a maintainer judges that a contribution doesn't comply with this policy, they may paste the following response:

Reviewer: this language sounds be a bit too restrictive for maintainers - we don't want to have prescriptions of what to say and not to say. I'm ok for the maintainer to say something like "this is not good code, closing" rather than using canned replies :)

Reviewer 2: @nyurik Fixed!

# AI Contributions Policy

MapLibre's policy is that contributors can use whatever tools they would like to craft their contributions, but there must be a **human in the loop**.

**Contributors must read and review all LLM-generated code before marking a pull request as ready for review**. The contributor is always the author and is fully accountable for their contributions, which includes ensuring their contributions are aligned with repository-specific contribution guidelines.

Contributors should be sufficiently confident that their contribution is high enough quality that asking for a review is a good use of scarce maintainer time, and they should be **able to answer questions about their work** during review.

## Disclosure

Community members are **expected to be transparent and label contributions that contain substantial amounts of tool-generated content**, including in issues, pull requests and bug reports.

"Substantially" means different things depending on the type of content:

- **Code**: any generation beyond single-line autocomplete, such as whole functions, tests, or algorithms

> - **Written content** (PR descriptions, issue reports, documentation, comments): anything more than a sentence or two that you did not type yourself

Reviewer 2: I think this is in conflict with the next section, where we essentially forbid using AI for comments.

Maybe to simplify this section we can simply drop the word 'substantial' and just mention we expect disclosure for generated content no matter what.

Author: I can take another look later on. But let's not remove the definition of "substantial". Let's make it more clear. This is the difference between a policy and a statement, and it is important, if we are to defend this as a policy.

The section below overlaps, by saying the same thing a different way. So there is no conflict, but there is potentially some redundancy.

The challenge of crafting this section comes from slightly different approaches taken by Clang, Zulip, the two policies on which this one is based.

Perhaps the two sections could be combined, and the meaning made more clear? Can you think of a better way to be specific about what substantial means in these two contexts?

Reviewer 2: Here's my suggestion:

https://github.com/maplibre/maplibre/pull/498

Author: Good suggestion. I cherry-picked the change, then applied some minor edits for clarity.

> Community members are expected to be transparent and **label pull requests, issues, and other contributions** that contain substantial amounts of LLM-generated content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Community members are expected to be transparent and disclose AI usage in contributions submitted for review that contain substantial amounts of LLM-generated content.
```

"Label pull requests and issues" typically means to add a GitHub label. That might be confusing. So I think using "disclose" is better here.

I think disclosure should be required for code and documentation contributions (here called "contributions submitted for review"). Issues should not be written with AI (as per section above).

# AI Contributions Policy

> **MapLibre welcomes AI-assisted contributions. Contributions the author cannot explain or has not verified are not welcome, regardless of how they were produced.**

Reviewer 2: OK we started here:

> We encourage contributors to review all generated code before sending it for review to verify its correctness and to understand it so that they can answer questions during code review. Reviewing and maintaining generated code that the original contributor does not understand is not a good use of limited project resources.

Now this iteration we are making the wording more strict. Instead of saying "we encourage" we are basicallly saying: if you don't understand your contribution through and through, it is not welcome and your pull request will be closed.

Honestly, this does not reflect how I am currently viewing or handling AI generated contributons as a maintainer. Let's look at some examples:

- Someone shoots in an AI contribution that fixes a crash. It's a good faith contribution in the sense that it fixes a problem for them. But they did not take the time to understand the fix or the context of the crash. Should this be considered an unwelcome contribution?

My answer: no. This could have been a bug report, but instead this person let an LLM loose on the codebase and let it implement a fix. Maybe the fix is good. In that case, I as maintainer don't have to go hunt for the fix. I can just merge their PR and done. If it is a quickfix (LLMs tend to go for these, because they often don't have enough context for an architectually sound fix) then it is often still a good starting point for a maintainer or core contributor to implement a proper fix (see e.g. [#4217](https://github.com/maplibre/maplibre-native/pull/4217)).

- Sometimes AI is an enabler for work that would not get done otherwise. This is especially the case when porting code between different languages and when there are proper guardrails in place for  verification (tests).

  - Example: [porting the hillshade algorithms from MapLibre GL JS to MapLibre Native](https://github.com/maplibre/maplibre-native/pull/3965). This work made heavy use of AI, but I don't think Andrew fully understands the intricate details of these algorithms. If we added that as a requirement, it would simply not get done. Why did I accept this contribution? Well, we have good verification in place (render tests), having an AI generated implementation is better than not having this implementation at all and if something happens to not work properly the fallout is scoped to just this new functionality. (Of course, you can disagree with my judgement here.)

  - Another example: I [ported](https://github.com/maplibre/earcut4j/commit/f8c5b9a17f632a6895262beceb8afd96b9d5b9df) tests from earcut (the JavaScript version) to the Java version (using AI). Then I let an LLM loose to fix those problems. Note: these real problems had been reported and gone **unfixed for 6 years**. To be very honest, I did not take the time to understand earcut well enough to pass the bar this AI policy is setting. Doing that would have taken so much time that I probably would not have landed these changes at all, and we'd still have a (human written) broken tesselator as a dependency...

In short, I would argue there is actually a place for AI generated contributions that are not fully understood by the person making the contribution...

Author: Since the core goal of this effort is to make sure contributors understand the code they are submitting, I am not sure what you are arguing, except that the AI Policy was already fine and does not need to change in any way? If you have a different position, please clarify.

Reviewer 2: Hmm if were to enforce that, we would really change our approach to AI generated contributions, as evidenced by the examples of instances where it (in my opinion) has been warranted to relax the requirement that contributors understand their contributions thoroughly.

To give yet another example: MapLibre Native has four different rendering backends (OpenGL ES, Metal, Vulkan and WebGPU). I think using an LLM to port modifications from one backend to another is a perfectly fine usage of LLMs, even if a contributor is for example not very well versed in the target shader language (and thus does not understand the submitted code fully).

Author: Contributors must understand the code they are contributing — that is a rule of thumb. It is not a restriction on porting code. It arose out of direct discussion with other maintainers and members of the board as the primary rubric we need to use.

I understand you are pointing out that there are exceptions to this rule. That is what I would expect. If you explain directly to the contributors to a specific code base what the right interpretation of this general rule is, you can still find meaning in it, as the porting example you are citing does not negate the general rule that anyone strapped to an LLM should churn out untested C++ and submit PRs and expect them to be reviewed. There is an opportunity here for a win-win if you are able to align on the big picture concerns.

I ask that you save these caveats and concerns so we can apply them to how we "operationalize" this policy within Native and other closely related code bases.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough! 

So thinking about operationalizion. I think the "four eyes" principle is important. I.e. have at least two people with a brain take a look at code and make a reasonable judgement if we should take it on or not, whether I or them  _fully_ understand it or not is less important. Most of the PRs I sign off on I don't read line by line...

As a maintainer I need to trust that there is a reasonable person on the other end too. If there's not, I at least need to know! Then I know it's just the two eyes.

It's hard to capture this in a policy. 

But what would maybe lessen the burden on me (or on @HarelM who has to deal with more PRs) is some kind of label that we can quickly tag on a PR, causing a bot to post a message which asks for clarification on AI usage and link this policy. We would use it when our spidey senses tell us the contributor did not put so much effort into the PR. That will help us calibrate how seriously we should take a PR. And for the next contribution, the author will be aware of our policies and etiquette for LLM usage.

Author: Detecting AI contributions presupposes there are stable tells we can leverage to tag and warn. This is a hard problem actually. I think there are simpler and more standard ways to operationalize, eg with the approaches you already use: tightening descriptions of best practices within a code base, reminding and enforcing rules in templates, and using automation and tests wherever possible.

Reviewer 3: Bart was not suggesting a bot to detect this.
Detecting quality is not somethign which we have good metrics for, but humans know quality supprisingly well when they see it.

Author: Thanks for the correction @CommanderStorm I edited my comment to remove the reference to bots. 

I am trying to steer people away from detecting or judging whether something is AI, as this has proved problematic and unenforceable on other projects. But ultimately it is up to Bart, and you, how you operationalize this.

> MapLibre's policy on AI generated contributions is that contributors are permitted to use artificial intelligence tools to produce contributions. However, contributors are responsible for their contributions, and must ensure their quality. Contributors must also ensure consistency with all relevant copyright, intellectual property, and licensing restrictions.

Reviewer 2: > Contributors must also ensure consistency with all relevant copyright, intellectual property, and licensing restrictions.

I am not a native speaker, but I am not sure if consistency is the right word here. I think we should keep the reference to the GitHub TOS because it is the legal basis for incorporating all contributions. And that has been carefully worded by lawyers.

Author: The reference to the GitHub TOS is maintained.

## Why this policy exists

Within our project, the additional time and cognitive load required to parse verbose or hallucinated responses is not sustainable. Your contributions are the heart of our community; this policy specifies the baseline standard under which maintainers will decline to spend time on contributions that dilute our efforts to integrate what you bring.

## Contributor responsibility

The expectations in this section apply to every contribution, with or without AI assistance. We make them explicit here because coding with AI assistance can easily pull contributors outside their domains of comfort and experience.

In addition to the specific requirements listed below, ensure your code, comments, and explanations are free of unnecessary repetition, vague assertions, or contradictory statements.

> ### Pull requests

Reviewer 2: These requirements are written as if they apply to all pull requests, but tests are not applicable for all pull requests, and not all pull requests contain code

When you file a pull request:

- You must have run the code and verified it behaves as you claim.
- You must understand how to write and contribute tests, and what the test coverage you add means.
- You must understand what your changes do. During code review, you must be able to explain each significant change in your own words.

If you cannot answer reviewer questions about your own PR in a straightforward manner, the PR will be closed.

### Bug reports

- You must personally reproduce the issue using a working minimal demonstration. An AI tool's description of a bug is not a reproducer.

> - Reports whose filer does not supply a working demonstration on request will be closed.

Reviewer 2: This is too hashly worded, we get reports of crashes that are hard or impossible to reproduce. Like, it might happen in one in a million devices. We still value those reports even though they are not reproducible.

### Maintainer authority

Maintainers are not obligated to debug or explain code on an author's behalf, nor to reproduce bug reports the filer has not verified. A contribution whose author cannot meet the expectations will be closed. Closing is not hostile; it is how maintainer time is protected.

## Copyright and licensing

> Using AI tools to regenerate copyrighted material does not remove the copyright. As per the [GitHub TOS](https://docs.github.com/en/site-policy/github-terms/github-terms-of-service#6-contributions-under-repository-license), contributors are responsible for ensuring they have the right to contribute code under the terms of the repository license. This responsibility applies equally to code written by hand, code generated by an AI tool, and code adapted from elsewhere.

Author: @louwers here is the reference to the GitHub TOS (below this line). I removed the section at the top as it is repetitious, I added it to keep in the spirit of the original, which heavily emphasized concerns about copyright.

Contributors are permitted to use AI tools to produce contributions, provided they have the right to license the resulting code under the applicable license. Violations are handled under the [IP violation policy](./INTELLECTUAL_PROPERTY_VIOLATION_POLICY.md).

## Disclosure

We ask contributors to disclose significant AI assistance in pull requests and bug reports. "Significant" means any generation beyond single-line autocomplete: whole functions, tests, documentation, bug descriptions, or research. When in doubt, disclose.

Disclosure is not penalized and does not lower the bar set by the responsibility section above. It helps reviewers calibrate attention and ask better follow-up questions.

**How to disclose:**

> Disclose significant AI assistance in your PR or bug report by adding `Assisted-By:` and the model name. For code generated by AI, add `Generated-By:` and the model name. Similar annotations within your commit messages are optional but appreciated.

Reviewer 3: I don't think that users will follow this part, so we might as well remove it.
Also, I don't fully think this helps me in reviewing code.. I know it is slop when I look at slop.

```suggestion
Disclosure is not penalized and does not lower the bar set by the responsibility section above. It helps reviewers calibrate attention and ask better follow-up questions.
```

Author: One of the requests voiced when I started this effort is that we ask people to explicitly name what model they are using. My commentary on that is that if we want compliance with that type of request, we should, in general, destigmatize the use of AI. In specific terms, we should spell out how we want them to disclose, and we should strive to normalize such disclosures. With this in mind, please reconsider this?

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer not to include the specific “how to disclose” format as written. Personally, I don’t find the exact model attribution very useful in practice when reviewing code.

What I do care about is whether AI meaningfully influenced the result — especially in cases where the outcome differs from what I’d expect a human to produce or where extra scrutiny is warranted. In those cases, I’m fully in favor of disclosing AI assistance.

For more lightweight use (e.g. exploration, autocomplete, or minor phrasing), I don't think strict attribution adds much value and is unlikely to be followed consistently anyway.
I don't do that and I don't think any of the devs in this org do, so I think this is a bit unresonable of an ask

So I’d lean toward encouraging disclosure in principle, but keeping it flexible rather than prescribing a specific format or requiring model-level detail.

Reviewer 3: What we can ask for is things like https://github.com/maplibre/maplibre-tile-spec/pull/1306 where @nyurik said that he vibed the browser, but we all don't care about the code, except that it mostly works.

Being frank:
I am fine with that level of documentation. I don't want more admin work there.
I will not do pointless admin work on every commit.

Author: Please align with @birkskyum on this; come back when you both agree on what is most helpful here.

Reviewer 3: @birkskyum and I compromised that this can be a PR level documentation requirement if the PR looks bad, but not otherwise.
We don't want to add useless overhead.

```suggestion
Disclosure is not penalized and does not lower the bar set by the responsibility section above.
It helps reviewers calibrate attention and ask better follow-up questions.

**How to disclose:**

Disclose significant AI assistance in your PR or bug report by adding `Assisted-By:` and the model name.
```
